Linux, like all UNIX-based operating systems, consists of one big filesystem tree. Actually, it is usually diagrammed as an inverted tree with the root directory, /, being at the top of the tree.

Within this one large logical filesystem there may be more than one, even many, distinct filesystems, mounted at various points, which appear as subdirectories. These distinct filesystems are usually on different partitions, which can be on any number of devices, including those which are on a network.

Regardless of exactly how things are joined together, it all just looks like one big filesystem; applications do not usually care at all about what physical device files actually reside on.

Once upon a time, different UNIX-like operating systems organized this one big tree in varying ways; even among the various Linux distributions there were many differences. This made both writing applications and accomplishing system administration tasks on more than one kind of system difficult and often frustrating.

As a consequence, the Linux ecosystem has worked hard to establish standardized procedures to minimize such pain.


Data Distinctions
When talking about how files and data are organized in the one big directory tree, it is important to learn some taxonomy on what kind of information has to be read and written. In particular, there are two kinds of distinctions.


There are two kinds of distinctions...
Shareable vs. non-shareable
Shareable data is that which can be shared between different hosts. Non-shareable data is that which must be specific to a particular host. For example, user home directories may be shareable, while device lock files are not.

Variable vs. static
Static data include binaries, libraries, documentation, and anything that does not change without system administrator assistance. Variable data is anything that may change, even without a system administrator's help.

The Filesystem Hierarchy Standard
The Filesystem Hierarchy Standard (FHS), administered originally by the Free Standards Group, and now by The Linux Foundation, specifies the main directories that need to be present, and describes their purposes. The Filesystem Hierarchy Standard document can be retrieved online.

By specifying a standard layout, the FHS simplifies predictions of file locations. While most Linux distributions respect the FHS, probably none of them follow it exactly, and the last official version might not take into account some new developments.

Distributions like to experiment and eventually some of the experiments become generally accepted.



FHS Linux Standard Directory Tree
Table: Main Directories
Directory	Purpose
/	Primary directory of the entire filesystem hierarchy
/bin	Essential executable programs that must be available in single user mode
/boot	Files needed to boot the system, such as the kernel, initrd or initramfs images, and boot configuration files and bootloader programs
/dev	Device Nodes, used to interact with hardware and software devices
/etc	System-wide configuration files
/home	User home directories, including personal settings, files, etc.
/lib	Libraries required by executable binaries in /bin and /sbin
/lib64	64-bit libraries required by executable binaries in /bin and /sbin, for systems which can run both 32-bit and 64-bit programs
/media	Mount points for removable media such as CDs, DVDs, USB sticks, etc.
/mnt	Temporarily mounted filesystems
/opt	Optional application software packages
/proc	Virtual pseudo-filesystem giving information about the system and processes running on it. Can be used to alter system parameters.
/run	Run-time variable data, containing information describing the system since it was booted. Replaces the older /var/run
/sys	Virtual pseudo-filesystem giving information about the system and processes running on it. Can be used to alter system parameters. Similar to a device tree and is part of the Unified Device Model.
/root	Home directory for the root user
/sbin	Essential system binaries
/srv	Site-specific data served up by the system. Seldom used.
/tmp	Temporary files; on many distributions lost across a reboot and may be a ramdisk in memory.
/usr	Multi-user applications, utilities and data; theoretically read-only.
/var	Variable data that changes during system operation
 

There may be additional distribution-specific directories found under the root directory. These might include /misc, which can be used for miscellaneous data, and /tftpboot, which is used for booting using tftp. If there are files in the directory, they are related to diskless workstation booting. Note that having other directories does not violate the FHS; however, it does violate it to have components in directories other than those dictated by the standard.